[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
[Applause]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, you know, we're several months, I
guess like five months or so, recording
this September 16th. 5 months or so
since liberation day, since the uh trade
war started.
>> By and large,
>> the world is still kind of working,
right? You could see its effects for
sure in certain categories and so forth,
but by and large, I don't think the
contours of the economy look that much
different than they did say in March or
April.
>> Look, I'm still missing my auction item
that's supposed to be mailed from the
Netherlands. So, it has affected me
directly.
>> Wait, what happened with it? Wait, wait.
Say more. Say more about So, I I won
something from a Dutch auction house and
um they were supposed to mail it
in-house shipping and instead of mailing
it, they sent out an email saying that
they can't mail it because everyone's
trying to figure out the new tariff
schedule and customs and things like
that. I still haven't heard from them,
>> but it still feels like something
happened. There was some sort of
rupture. kind of hard to imagine going
to a March 2025 world again, but also
hard to imagine going to a pre-Trump one
world ever. Like, it's hard for me to
imagine that in my lifetime that there
will ever be a sort of 2015 style
trading relationship between the US and
China.
>> I could be wrong.
>> Never say never, but
>> it's just hard for me to see at this
point.
>> At this point, like it's not a single
administration thing, right? We've had
Trump 1.0
And then Biden continued a lot of the
tariffs and even added some new ones.
And then we have Trump 2.0 which is
arguably going even harder on China. So
it does seem like at least a durable
trend, not a flash in the pan.
>> And as we've discussed, you mentioned
the fact that Biden was a continuation
arguably an expansion of Trump won
particularly with some of the export
restrictions on technology.
Um, yeah, this is one of the rare trade
rethinking the global trading system,
whatever that means, is one of the rare
areas of bipartisan consensus in DC as
has come up in many episodes.
>> Yeah, that and housing
>> uh that and housing, right? That housing
is very expensive. We really do have the
perfect guest. Someone who has a very
big picture view on trade. Someone who
has been directly involved in trade
negotiations. Someone who remembers the
sort of pre-Trump one
>> the long long long ago
>> the long long long ago global trading
system and uh who could talk about
whatever remnants of that are left or
even maybe who can explain to me what
the global trading system was. We're
going to be speaking with Michael
Froman. is the president of the council
on foreign relations and he was the
former US trade representative during
the Obama uh Obama 2 administration 2013
to 2017 has continued to write a lot
about this topic so uh Michael Frman
thank you so much for uh coming on
outlaws thrilled to have
>> thanks for having me
>> absolutely what does the US trade
representative do you you had that job I
actually realize I don't really know
>> like it's fine it's a great job um uh it
really has the function of negotiating
trade agreements okay um and enforcing
US trade rights under previous
agreements. Um the reason I love the job
is that it combines high diplomacy,
sitting down with ministers, presidents,
prime ministers of other countries
trying to reach agreements with having
to have a really detailed understanding
of elements of the US economy. I mean, I
learned more from American farmers
teaching me the 500 things you can do
with a molecule of milk and how they
manipulate a molecule of milk to to
circumvent trade restrictions and get
around tariffs. You export it as butter
or as whey or as low calorie powder or
whatever.
>> This is a whole episode, right?
>> A whole episode right there. But that's
only one example of of the literally
thousands of issues you have to learn as
US trade rep to be able to sit down with
your counterparts in other countries and
negotiate agreements.
>> Can you give us an idea or a sense of
the average negotiation? What exactly is
the process? Like do you meet for the
first time in a designated room
somewhere or is there prep that goes
into these? You're exchanging emails.
What exactly happens? So in the in the
in the past and of course it's a very
different situation now but in the past
the US or another country might come up
with an idea of what they wanted to do
in a trade negotiation a set of issues
they wanted to take on a set of
countries they wanted to negotiate with
and they would go around and do
consultations with other countries float
the ideas see what kind of feedback they
got and scope out the nature of the
negotiation. Is it going to be just
about goods and tariffs? Is it going to
touch upon agriculture and regulations
and services and labor and environment
and all various other issues that have
become part of trade negotiations in the
past and get agreement by the other
countries that this was the agenda and
then in the past usually it's the US
that has been sort of driving the
agenda. These would be the topics we
would deal with. The US would come up
with proposals of what are the
disciplines that we would like to see in
each of these areas. What are the rules
that we'd like to see? And it was the
way the US brought other countries along
to adopt high standard rules across one
sector or one subject matter or or
another. And the idea was uh we know we
live in a high wage um highly regulated
economy. We compete with economies that
often times have lower wages, lower
regulation. And if we could raise other
count's standards closer to our own, it
would level the playing field for
American workers and farmers and
ranchers and make it easier for us to
compete.
>> I mean, for better or worse, it really
just seems like a totally different era.
Now, the idea of getting to the idea of
going back to some world where the US is
actively working with a bunch of country
on rules rather than rates, tariff, it
really does seem it seems like ancient
history. It just seems so right.
>> Look, I think that's right. First of
all, I think I think the the
international trading system had been
under stress for some time. President
Trump in some ways put was the final
nail in the in the coffin of it. But,
you know, the global multilateral
rulesbased system, that's like the WTO,
the World Trade Organization, where 160
plus countries got together, agreed to a
set of rules, agreed to some mechanisms
for enforcing those rules and for
monitoring them. That's been under
stress for for a long time. There's been
dissatisfaction and I think now in fact
is you're you're right. I think we can't
go back to the way things were
pre-Trump. We're going to have to think
about what comes next.
>> Just to play devil's advocate for a
second, to what extent did we actually
have a rules-based trading system in the
sense that everyone was actually
beholdened to the same limitations or
the same rules? Because looking back,
there were always accusations about
China cheating or maybe the US was
taking advantage in in some way. And in
fact, you could argue that that sense of
unfairness is kind of what got us to
where we are today. So, was it really
rules-based for everyone?
>> So, I think we have to look back at the
the whole history of the post-war
period. Uh because for decades, China
wasn't a factor. It wasn't part of the
global trading system. It wasn't a major
economy and it was the US and Europe,
Japan, others who came together to
really form this set of rules and it's
never a perfect system. You my my sense
is you what what rules means is that
most countries follow most of the rules
most of the time.
>> Not that it's 100% perfection. By the
way, that's true when you have laws in
the United States. I mean, we have laws
in the United States because people do
commit crimes. The existence of laws
does not prevent people from committing
crimes. That's why you need enforcement.
Same thing is true on the international
side. Uh as well the big difference as
you pointed out Tracy is when China
became a major factor in the global
economy and began to integrate globally.
Um on one hand there was an opportunity
to say okay this is an opportunity for
bring China into the global system. Get
them to adopt these set of rules that
the rest of us have all agreed to
because they appear to be on this path
towards market reform, openness,
liberalization. Right? I think what
happened in reality is that that
trajectory wasn't as linear, didn't go
as far, didn't go as fast as people
anticipated. And what we did not
anticipate is that somebody like
President Xi would come in and in fact
stop or reverse it. And so now we have
an economy that is huge, second largest
economy in the world, biggest
manufacturing part of the uh the global
economy, likely to be accounting for
something like 45% of all global
manufacturing in a few years, which is
the biggest that any country has ever
been in history. And it's following a
fundamentally different set of rules.
And that has led to a lot of the stress
in the international system.
[Music]
Can you explain maybe the philosophical
premise behind the idea that
trade with China
I guess why do we care about what their
internal rules are right theory of trade
it's sort Okay, they're cheaper for
whatever reason or they're more
efficient, etc. And so, you know,
comparative advantage, we benefit from
that. Why does the global trading
system, why is it or was it or is it
premised on this notion that all of the
participants would trend in some sort of
more liberal direction with their
domestic economies? You know, I think
it's because the actions that China has
taken domestically to drive their really
quite remarkable economic growth over
the last few decades uh does have
ramifications outside of China has
ramifications for the rest of the world
for manufacturing in the rest of the
world for for other factors. And so it's
it's not something that can be limited
to China. If if China gets to where it's
going because it steals intellectual
property uh because it produces
overcapacity so it produc creates far
more factories than it needs to for the
reasonable demand for a product in order
to drive other producers out of the
market in other countries that has an
adverse effect on us. If they subsidize
stateowned enterprises um or even
private enterprises in such a way that
it creates this unlevel playing field
then it affects the rest of us as well.
And I think that's what's really
happened is that uh China whether it's a
stateowned enterprises subsidization
intellectual property rights theft
government intervention into the private
sector all towards positioning China as
the leading manufacturer but it has come
at the expense of other industrialized
countries in some cases other emerging
economies and that's why there's been
this counter reaction. M so I know you
were a trade representative before the
tensions with China really ramped up um
under the first Trump administration but
how were you thinking back then about
incentivizing other countries when it
comes to trade negotiations like carrot
and stick strategy was it mostly about
incentives and if so what were you
giving them or was it sometimes maybe
threats
>> so you have to use both I think on the
threat side it's not really threats it
was enforcement
that we would bring cases against
countries including China
>> at the WTO or against other trading
partners where we had arrangements uh if
they we felt that they were violating
our rights under those agreements. Uh we
brought during the Obama administration
I think we brought the most cases ever
brought against China. We won all the
cases that got to conclusion. The
problem was China would find ways either
of delaying implementation or by the
time the fix was implemented the
relevant industry in the United States
or elsewhere was gone. And so it was
really sort of cold comfort and that's
one of the challenges I think that we
saw in the in the World Trade
Organization. I think on the incentive
side that's where trade agreements, real
trade agreements come into play.
>> Uh I was involved in something called
the Trans-Pacific Partnership which was
12 countries around the Asia-Pacific
region that were working on opening
their economies to each other abiding by
a high standard set of of rules.
>> Some of the countries already had free
trade agreements with us. about half of
them did. So we weren't giving them any
more access to our economy. We'd already
given them access, but at the table we
had Japan. And Japan was a economy that
had never really opened up to other
markets. And these other countries knew
that they couldn't get Japan to open on
their own. But if the US was pushing
Japan to open, they would benefit from
it. M
>> so you had countries like Peru or Chile
who had already had free trade
agreements with us willing to raise
their labor standards or willing to
enforce environmental laws because they
were getting access not to our market
but to Japan and that incentive was one
that was powerful for them.
>> That's a very uh that's a very
interesting dynamic. talk a little bit
more about those years 2013 pre-Trump
and the actions toward China because if
you said by that point Obama had already
introduced a record number of actions
against China winning many of them or
winning all of them did you say
>> all of them that went to conclusions
>> all of them that went to conclusion but
it didn't really matter because either
there was some way to evade or the US
industry had been decimated was there
something pre-Trump I mean I don't know
whenever that was was there a feeling
that something has to change
fundamentally in how the US and China
trade or the rules governing that trade
even at that point.
>> No, absolutely. Look, the the day one of
the Obama administration, uh the the
world had been involved in something
called the Doha round of negotiations at
the World Trade Organization. It had
been going on since 2001.
>> And I remember going to a G20 summit.
There was one in April in London. and
all the other leaders around the table.
Here was the new president of the United
States on their mind was asking him,
okay, what are you going to do to bring
the Doha round to successful conclusion
this year? And the president said, "All
right, we're going to go back and take a
look at this." And he asked a group of
us to do a study. And by the summer, uh,
we had come back to him and said, "This
Doha round isn't going to get done." Uh
but the DA round was founded on this
fundamental premise in 2001 that
basically developing countries should it
was called the development round and the
primary beneficiaries of the DA round
would have been developing countries not
industrialized countries and the
fundamental premise was developing
countries shouldn't have to live by too
many rules.
industrial countries should and this
would help the developing countries
catch up.
>> By 2009, when we saw what had happened
with China between 2001 and 2009, there
was no way that an agreement that gave
China a pass on rules so that it could
continue to expand its manufacturing and
undermine manufacturing around the world
that that was going to fly. And the
president went back to the other leaders
at the next G20 meeting and said the
Doha round is not going to get done on
the path that is currently on. And I
remember we were at a G20 summit and the
other leaders all went around and read
their talking points. The traditional
talking point at the time was a Doha
round will get completed by December
this year or by the ministerial this
year. And you know, President Obama
intervened. He made his point. the other
leaders read their talking points and he
put his flag back up
>> and said, you know, you guys aren't
listening. This isn't going to happen.
And that was the first indication that
something needed to change.
>> Yeah. And then we were sitting down with
the Chinese bilaterally in lots of
consultations um sort of unending
consultations and we'd have this
conversation with them and remind them
that their tremendous success was based
on a benign international environment
the capacity to export to the rest of
the world and that if we didn't address
these underlying concerns stateown
enterprises subsidization IPR rights etc
that benign international environment
was going to disappear and that of
course is exactly what's happened and
that's the bipartisan consensus against
China that has now emerged. We started
warning them of that back in 2009 2010
and I think we made some modest progress
during the Obama administration to get
them change certain certain practices
but by the time President Xi came in and
made it clear he was going to be
dominant in the following sectors he was
going to reduce his dependency on the
rest of the world and increase everybody
else's dependency on China the the game
was over. Actually, this leads into my
next question, which is we've talked a
lot about how, you know, there was this
break in the rules-based liberal trading
order. Was there a single moment where
you went like, "Aha, this has
fundamentally broken instead of just
like slowly declining, slowly changing.
Was there something that sticks out to
you about, wow, this is actually
changing right now?"
>> So, I I think that Doha moment back in
2009 was one of them. Um uh I also think
later on in in the Obama administration,
we were trying to negotiate an agreement
over environmental goods. There was a
list of 250 or so products that would
have been, you know, good for countries
to buy more of and produce more of
because it was good for the environment,
for climate change or otherwise. And it
failed. It failed over bicycles.
that between China and the EU, the EU
was protecting the Polish bicycle
industry.
>> The China wanted to put bicycles on the
list and they couldn't agree on what to
do with bicycles. And so the entire
agreement fell over that one issue. And
to me, it sort of underscored, okay,
we're pretty far from reaching consensus
that if we can't reach agreement over
bicycles,
>> um, we're not going to reach agreement
over things that are much more
meaningful.
>> Were you surprised at all? I want to we
start to move a little bit closer to the
present. But before we go to the
present, was it inevitable that in your
view that the Biden administration ended
up as a continuation slashexpansion of
some of the Trump restrictions? Was
there still an opportunity to turn
somewhere closer to a pre-Trump path? I
I think there was an opportunity to make
some changes but not go back to the way
things were before. The the Biden
administration, for example, launched a
review of the China tariffs.
>> And I think in many respects, the B
administration was very strategic in how
it approached export controls and
foreign investment constraints. It was
very targeted. The tariffs, they
launched a review to try and distinguish
between strategic and non-strategic
tariffs. Like there's a case to be made
for tariffs if there's unfair trade
practices or if it's a product that you
really need to produce here in the
United States. You don't want
dependency, but do we need tariffs on
t-shirts and underwear and socks? Is
that important to our national security?
Um, and they never got themselves to the
position of reducing those tariffs. And
to me, it's not a necessarily a
criticism of of the Biden
administration. I think it just goes to
show that tariffs are easy to put on and
hard to take off because once they're
on, there are constituencies
of that are supportive of them and any
movement to to reduce tariffs,
particularly in this political context,
is seen as being weak on China, even if
it makes pure sense from a economic
point of view. You know who who is hurt
most by tariffs on underwear, t-shirts,
and socks? It tends to be low-income
Americans who spend a disproportionate
amount of their disposable income on
imported goods. And you know, we could
afford to bring in those products from
China without questioning our national
security
>> without losing our strategic underwear
producing capacity. Although I think the
US military does actually have some
strategic
>> clothing. There are restrictions under
under uh uh I used to call it the
department of defense uh the department
of war that require uniforms, footwear
and other things to be made in the
United States.
>> Fun fact, how would you actually
describe the current state of the global
trade system? Because you know I' I've
heard people say there are shades of
mercantalism, protectionists, that sort
of thing. what what's your description
of where we are right now?
>> Well, I think the challenge of where we
are right now is you have the two
largest economies in the world uh the US
and China basically following their own
set of rules rather than the
multilateral rules-based system that the
US was very much driving the creation
and the defense of over all these um
over all these years. And when you have
the two largest economies doing that,
the question is well what's what are the
other economies going to do? Are they
going to start imitating the US or
China? Will they continue to abide by
the rules if nobody else does? Uh I
think they're all sort of wrestling with
that question because for for some of
them like the European Union, European
Union is more ideologically in favor of
free trade, integration, the rules based
system. The whole notion of the European
Union is based on that of bringing the
European countries together, let alone
the rest of the world. So, it's harder
for them to make this leap than it has
been for for the United States. But I
think the reality is is that the the
system is under is under great stress
and we're going to have to think through
how does it evolve? What are the
elements of it that we want to try and
preserve or or reconstitute? Um, and how
does it need to change to take into
account not only the lessons of the last
80 years prior to Trump, but the lessons
of the Trump administration, you know,
some of which will be instructive.
[Music]
Let's talk more about some of the paths
that things could go because I'm
thinking about setting aside even the
Europe Europe and the US uh you know
there was the bricks uh gathering
recently these are there are a lot of
countries whose own developmental
trajectory could be undermined by
China's manufacturing success. Right?
And yet perhaps because of the actions
of this administration etc. they don't
feel that there is a sort of comfortable
home or friend in DC and that maybe it
makes more sense for them even given the
uh competitive challenges to be uh
friendlier with Beijing etc. What is
your view on that? Do you believe there
could be a new I mean one thing we've
heard we were talking to uh we recently
interviewed Robert Kaplan vice chairman
over at Goldman Sachs. His view was
globalization is alive and well. It's
just that the US isn't really part of it
and that we're actually reemerging uh
sort of free trade etc except it's with
China at the helm. Is that a fair
characterization? Like what is happening
with these massive other countries as
they think about who their partners and
friends are? So first of all, I I think
uh I think globalization is not over.
Other countries continue to move ahead
to integrate their economies. European
Union has signed additional trade
agreements with with Americaur. They're
working on one with with uh India.
Africa has a continentalwide free trade
agreement signed a few years ago that
they're in the process of of
implementing. So I think uh uh Robert
Kaplan's observation that it's the US
that has exempted itself is to a certain
degree correct. I'm not sure the next
step is that this is all going to shift
to China and it's going to be a Chinaled
block because there's no country that's
more concerned about the potential
adverse impact of Chinese exports on
their own manufacturing and economic
aspirations than than India.
>> India and you could add Brazil, you
could add Indonesia, you could add South
Africa. They're all deeply concerned
that if the US and Europe begin to close
their markets, all that excess capacity
from China has to go somewhere and it
could well get dumped in their markets
and hurt their capacity to build up
their manufacturing uh base as well. And
so I I've been of the view that you know
we we had this the the cold war was
about bipolarity, US Soviet Union.
the the wall came down, Soviet Union was
dismantled, and that was kind of a
unipolar moment. That's over now. That
30-year period is over. What we have now
isn't multipolarity. It's not like
you've got two or three camps that do
everything together. A China camp, a US
camp, some other camp. I think it's
really more akin to like polyamorous
life, right? Like in India is the
perfect
>> We got our episode title.
>> That's right.
India is the greatest is the greatest
example of this. India loves the United
States at least until recently for
technical technological cooperation for
uh civil nuclear cooperation for
investment for the relationship between
the Indian diaspora and our you know
entrepreneurial um uh ecosystem here.
They love Russia for oil for arms. They
love Iran for oil. They love and they
hate depending on the day. Um they've
had it's one of the countries they've
gone to war with, you know, on their
border. They've had skirmishes. People
have died in armed conflict between
India and China. But then as you saw
recently, there was a a conference in
China where you had uh Modi, she and
Putin holding hands uh walking down the
red carpet together. So I think India is
is archetypal example of trying to play
these relationships. They always were
during the Cold War too, right? They
were they were nonaligned country,
right? I mean, it's changed now. Then
they were non-aligned. Now, I think
they're multi-aligned. So, they'll be
aligned with the polyamorous. And but
you you could use the same analysis to I
think cover a lot of other countries, a
lot of the other middle countries.
>> That makes it a much more complicated
world. You know, in retrospect, the Cold
War was very simple. Was black and
white. You were with us. You're with the
Soviet Union, you know, and there were
some proxy wars in between, but it was
pretty it was pretty simple. This is
much more complicated and it it leads to
the the view that you're going to have
to be very proactive and creative in
creating coalitions of the willing
around various issues because sometimes
India might be in it, sometimes they
might not, sometimes China might be in
it, sometimes not. And and I think
that's the the challenge for for the
United States to continue to exert
leadership going forward.
>> How resilient would those smaller
coalitions of the willing actually be?
because I can imagine maybe it's easier
to negotiate with a smaller group. Maybe
you don't get caught up in debates over
bicycles and things like that. But on
the other hand, if you don't have like a
big trading partner who is necessarily
driving the agenda, it seems like it
might be a little bit more difficult to
enforce.
I think you need a combination of
smaller groups of like-minded countries
but it does to your point Tracy require
leadership
>> and in the past the US has been a leader
of it. I mean you've got some very
strong examples like NATO
>> you know a military alliance is the
strongest example of a pluralateral
group so something less than the whole
world but of like-minded countries that
have agreed to do certain things
together because they have a common
interest to do so. I'm not sure it would
exist without US leadership and US
driving it going forward. That was true
of the Trans-Pacific Partnership uh as
well. I think it could be true of of a
number of these other things. And by the
way, China's very good at this. I mean,
the the conference, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization Conference that
they recently held uh where where Modi
and others were present, that's a good
example of them pulling together
coalitions. Um uh bricks is another good
example. Now, we can talk about the
strengths and the weaknesses of bricks
and where the countries actually have
common interests and conflicting
interests, but it's that kind of drive
that you need a leader and you need a
group of like-minded countries. Let's
talk a little bit more about some of
these tensions that emerge because
it does sound like you know bricks
bricks is a nice acronym that Jim O'Neil
from Goldman Sachs asset management came
up with in 2001 and which may now be um
you know this important geo uh
geopolitical entity we'll see we don't
really know for sure yet but it seems
like one possibility is that okay the US
we feel that we need to have in key
strategic sectors there's some sort of
you know capacity to build
semiconductors or maybe capacity to
build batteries at least there was a big
push under that under the Biden
administration of course China has that
and it's growing I mean when people
think about the economy going forward is
there a risk that essentially every
country feels they have to make that
decision that India feels it has to have
its own battery making capacity that
Germany feels it has to make its own
battery making capacity and that there
is a sort of domino effect and we just
wind up in a much costlier, less
efficient world.
>> Well, I think we are heading towards a
costlier, less efficient world. I'm not
sure that's necessarily a bad outcome.
Okay. in that um to to go down the path
of greatest efficiency
>> could be to at least in the short run to
become utterly dependent on China for
all of this product because they can
produce things cheaper not not
>> not always because it's cheaper labor
but because they become very efficient
infrastructure massive scale
>> massive scale and I think the question
is is it is it a good thing I mean is it
that the US have a battery industry and
that Europe have a battery industry it's
probably a good thing it may not be as
efficient as relying completely on
China, but having that diversification
particularly over the long run is a
positive. Rule number one of of risk
management, diversification. And yet we
became very complacent and very uh we
became very complacent over the years of
just relying on China as our
manufacturing floor. And now I think
companies have come to the conclusion
whether it was because of natural
disasters, COVID or political
intervention as we've seen with with
China that it's it's to their benefit,
their economic benefit even over the
longer run to diversify even in the
short run if it's more expensive. M with
your trade representative hat on, can
you maybe say something about how you
view military strategy and I guess trade
and this idea of well maybe we want to
be independent, maybe we want to have
independent capacity in something that's
strategically important like
semiconductors or I don't know making
ballistic missiles or something like
that. How does the US government
actually think about the relationship
between trade and military might? So I
think over time uh broadly economics and
national security have converged into
economic security and we're sorting
through what that means in practice. So
in the case of the Biden administration
they talked about a small yard and a
high fence. So take a limited number of
technologies and say these technologies
we refuse to export to our our
competitors and our adversaries. uh we
refuse to uh allow them to buy US
companies that specialize in those
technologies and refuse our companies to
who dominate that area to invest in in
China and give them their capacity. But
it was a relatively few sectors
relatively few technologies. The
question is is is there a inexraable set
of pressures to expand that yard and to
add more and more things to it and where
is it appropriate and and where is it
not appropriate and I think that's what
we're now sort of of wrestling with.
We're highly dependent on China for all
the ingredients that go into our
pharmaceuticals. Do we feel comfortable
with that? China's done nothing to say
they would cut it off but they could.
And we've seen recently China has used
its choke point capacity, rare earths,
magnets to demonstrate that it has
leverage too. And it worked. The Trump
administration raised tariffs to 145% on
China. China restricted the export of
certain rare earths and and magnets. And
suddenly there was a deescalation.
And so we have to now wrestle with that
and decide over the long run what
products do we actually need to be made
in the United States because they're so
critical to national security or our
sense of of of of national security and
which ones and this is where there's
been I think insufficient attention.
Which ones can we rely on our allies and
partners?
>> Because we probably can't produce
everything at least in the short run or
wouldn't make sense to produce
everything ourselves. But can we rely on
Canada and Europe and Japan and South
Korea and Mexico for some of this
production uh or in India? And how do we
differentiate between which products fit
in what group? And therefore then what
do we need to do about it to drive
production here where necessary and to
develop the relationships with the
allies and partners where possible. The
idea of friend shoring or whatever you
want to call it sounds very intuitive
and it's we don't need to build a ton of
shipyards. Maybe we could get the
Koreans uh to do that for us or I don't
know the probably the Fins are good at
it. I'm not sure. Uh etc. The Fins are
very good.
>> Oh, the Fins are the icebreaker. Yeah,
that's right. One of these facts that
we've learned over the years. But is
there I mean when you look at the
current administration, do you see
anything other than widening a gulf
between those partners? Like yeah, it
sounds great to have a nice relationship
with the Koreans for them to build more
ships for us and then that solves the
problem of scale and redundancy, etc.
But in practice, from your perspective,
is it going the opposite direction?
Well, look, I I think one of the
challenges of of any administration, but
it's certainly evident in this one, is
the connecting of dots between one
policy objective and another policy
objective.
>> And so, uh, yes, in the short run, it
it's going to take us a while to build
up our ship building industry, and it's
going to require a lot of government
support, and it's going to require a lot
of policies that we've not yet adopted.
Uh, perhaps it's something we should do,
but it will take years. Yeah. To really
build that up. In the meantime, should
we look to Korea? Should we look to
Japan? Uh should we look to Finland for
the ships that we need right now? That's
one set of objectives. Then you have the
the raid on the Hyundai plant, which was
another set of objectives, you know,
objectives around migration, illegal
migration and and and illegal workers. I
I I sometimes wonder whether the dots
are being connected within the
administration or whether there's a view
and they may be right, they may be wrong
that they can have it both ways that
they can come down on Korean workers in
the United States and still look to
Korea and say you will deliver us ships
>> and share your expertise and technical
knowledge and all that
>> and help us build ship uh building here
in the United States.
>> I want to broaden out the conversation.
>> Michael's being very ambassadorial by
the way. Anyway, keep going.
>> Of course. Um, just to broaden out the
conversation though, back in March, I
wrote an Odd Thoughts newsletter titled,
"The US is looking a lot like China."
>> I got an enormous amount of push back on
it, but you actually wrote something
similar. And I don't even have a
question. Just tell me that I was right.
>> Uh, you're right. Um, you were right.
Thank you. Look, I think we spent years,
we we always thought there was a theory
of convergence that by bringing China
into the international system,
>> we would become more alike. Now, our
view was they would become more like us.
>> Like us. Yeah.
>> More open, more liberal, more
marketoriented. And we used to go to
them and lecture them about don't be
protectionist. Uh don't restrict foreign
investment in your country. Don't don't
make it impossible for our companies to
invest in your company. Don't engage in
industrial policy and subsidization. and
don't take stakes in private companies
and and intervene in in the private
sector. And now what are we doing? We
are protectionist. Uh we have
restrictions on foreign investment. Uh
we are engaged in in limited industrial
policy. And now we're beginning to take
stakes, government stakes in private
companies. So rather than them becoming
more like us, we have become more like
them. And the challenge of that, I
think, is that we're now competing with
them on their playing field under their
set of rules.
>> I'm not at all convinced that we can
compete on their playing field as well
as we can compete on ours. Uh because we
don't have unlimited we can't go to
Congress and say give us unlimited
resources to invest in this sector after
after that sector. Uh we can't
subsidize, you know, the the the
commanding heights of uh of the
technology uh competition. And I think
it's it's unfortunate because I think
the Chinese can play that game much
better than we can.
>> Yeah, I think this is a really important
point because when we're thinking about,
you know, choke points in terms of
manufacturing or whatever, China has the
most experience out of practically
anyone in the world of like building up
strategic capacity and doing it in a
very conscious and interventionist way.
Well, and also a lot of that sort of um
massive uh over supply that people call
it is maybe to some extent intentional
but maybe also just to some extent a a
function of their provincial versus
provincial relationship where the
provinces are hyperco competing etc for
market share.
>> That's just a dynamic that that does
nothing like that exists in the United
States. And so the idea of moving in
that direction all kinds of conditions
either by design or just sort of by
happen stance of the political structure
of the system. It's just very different.
>> No, exactly right Joe. I think you know
in in their case
leadership says we want to be dominant
in these 15 sectors. Every provincial
governor looks at that and says, "All
right, I'm going to take my local state
judged by judged ability to produce
this." And we have, you know, in China,
I think there are over a hundred EV
companies,
>> right?
>> You know, and so and they're producing
and they will be producing enough cars
>> for to meet the demand of the entire
world. So where does that leave the US
auto sector? Where does it leave the the
European uh auto sector? Now, in our
case, I think, you know, we've
effectively kept them out. We've
effectively said we're not going to have
Chinese EVs here, at least at the
moment.
>> Europeans have a slight, you know, more
schizophrenic about it. They've also
adopted protectionism, but they're more
open, I think, to having uh Chinese
imports.
>> What does that mean for the future of
Volkswagen, for the future of Renault,
for the future of the other auto
companies? And you know, in that case,
it could have broad political
implications in Europe uh as well over
time. I hesitate to ask this question,
but is there anything the US can learn
from China in terms of, you know, trade
and building out strategic industries?
>> Well, look, I I think China, we we
shouldn't make China to into more than
it is. China's made huge mistakes.
They've wasted hundreds of billions of
dollars um on bad domestic investments
and they've got, you know, tremendous
challenges, including demographic
challenges that the US uh uh currently
does doesn't have. Uh and so we
shouldn't make them out to be, you know,
12 feet tall. I think one thing that is
current is to think through, okay, if
there is an industry that you think is
important for national security or
otherwise, what's the best way of
supporting it by the government? Um the
Trump administration's approach I think
has been based largely on tariffs,
>> right?
>> That if we create this wall of tariffs,
companies will have to produce or have
to move their supply chain to the United
States. Uh and that's how we'll build
out this area. I think what we've seen
in China is that yes, they've used
tariffs and other restrictions. They've
also used industrial policy. They've
also invested,
>> subsidies, credit, free energy. you
know, they've also invested heavily in
R&D um in in many sectors, the life
sciences, uh obviously AI among others,
government subsidies and government
investment. And it's that combination of
policies that probably is more effective
than tariffs alone.
>> To me, the concern is we we're
approaching this from a position of that
tariffs are the answer to everything. We
know what the cost of tariffs are and
we're taking a gamble on whether the
benefits will be there uh and whether
tariffs alone are going to remanufacture
the United States economy.
>> You mentioned that some degree of
greater redundancy and higher costs is
not the end of the world particularly if
uh there's some political it creates
some political sustainability. What is
what does the um the left tail risk
looks look like to you? What is the
scenario in which things really the
wheels really come off?
>> One, the US doesn't have a great history
with industrial policy. So, if we were
to multiply our efforts in in various
ways but not do it well, that would uh
that would be a waste of resources and
costs that we didn't need to need to
incur. I think if we don't to go back to
the point about allies and partners, if
we insist on reshoring everything and
not French shoring anything, I think we
probably lose some of the uh economies
of scale um and some of the comparative
advantage that we have. I also think if
we're if the if the existential threat
is competition with China, if they are
the pacing challenge, com working with
allies and partners is our way to reach
scale. Mhm.
>> We're a big economy. We're the biggest
economy in the world. But when it comes
to manufacturing, we're not going to be
able to compete with China alone
necessarily, or rather, we're going to
be able to compete with China much
better if we do so with our allies and
partners.
>> I have just one more question. This is
the most important one. How good are you
at Tradle?
>> Do you ever play that?
>> We do. I I we I love these games. Tradal
and World.
>> Oh, World. Yeah, that's the other one. I
didn't get into that.
>> Yeah. Portradal I think is is a great is
a great game. I don't always get it
right. U but I uh it's it's a good uh
it's a good reminder of just how complex
certain economies are.
>> After we're done with this, could you
help us find that dairy farmer who
explained the 500 different
>> Absolutely.
>> Absolutely. It's a fascinating uh
lesson.
>> Michael Froman, thank you so much for
coming on Oddlo.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> Thank you. That was great.
[Music]
Tracy, I'm really um I'm really a fan of
this neologism or wherever it came from
the the polyamorous world order because
you know people talk about the uh the G7
and what's his name talks about the
G0ero and then other people talk oh
bipolarity but uh but I think this is a
good one. It is kind of funny to me that
there's this idea out there that just
because Goldman came up with like a
catchy acronym for the bricks that
somehow that's going to like create a
new strategic coalition from
>> countries. We should have Jim O'Neal on
to talk about we've never talked to Jim
O'Neal and so the thought of him coming
up with this paper these are going to be
the big economies and now they now it's
a rival block for the West is like a
really good
>> Oh, that would be really interesting.
But I do think okay one thing you can
say about polyamorous relationships is
they tend to come with a lot of drama
right and so it
>> it definitely feels like um we're going
to have more instability or at least
like more things changing more things in
flux more volatility
>> right so this idea that I I I find it
compelling this idea that the old
globalization can't just be replaced
with the same globalization except the
leader has changed, right? I mean, the
US was this huge trade deficit country.
>> China is a huge trade surplus country.
That naturally means that its
relationship with all of its partners on
some level, even if it wants to be at
the forefront of creating new
tariff-free zones, etc., is going to be
of a different type than the
relationship that the US had.
>> Absolutely. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> All right. This has been another episode
of the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Michael Froman. He's at Mike Froman.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
Kerman Dashel Bennett at Dashbot at
Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all of these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots. gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we talk about the future of global
trade, then please leave us a positive
review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.